<chapter id="basics">
<title>Basics</title>

<sect1 id="starting-basics">
<title>Starting &kappname;</title>

    <para>Type <userinput><command>okteta</command></userinput> at a command
    prompt or select <guimenuitem>Hex Editor</guimenuitem> from the
    <menuchoice><guisubmenu>Applications</guisubmenu><guisubmenu>Utilities</guisubmenu></menuchoice> group in the &kmenu;.</para>

    <para>The standard &Qt; and &kde; command line
    options are available, and can be listed by entering
    <userinput><command>okteta</command> <option>--help</option></userinput>.</para>

    <para>Command line options specific to &kappname; are:</para>

    <para><option><replaceable>&lt;&URL;(s)&gt;</replaceable></option> - open
    file(s) from the specified &URL;(s)</para> 

<!--<para><option>- -offset</option>
<replaceable>&lt;offset&gt;</replaceable> jump to position
<replaceable>&lt;offset&gt;</replaceable> in the opened file.</para>-->
</sect1>

<sect1 id="usage-basics">
<title>Usage</title>

    <para>The main &kappname; window has the following components:
    a menu bar, a toolbar, a status bar, one or several sidebars with tools, and
    the main view with the tabbed data views.</para>

    <para>When a file is opened or a new byte array is created, the bytes
    contained are listed consecutively in lines with a given number of bytes
    per line. They are displayed in two variants: as the numeric values of the
    bytes and as the characters assigned to the values. Values and characters
    can be shown either separated in two columns or next to each other with the
    value on top of the character. On the left side the offsets of the first
    byte in each line are shown.</para>

    <para>The handling is similar to that of most text editors:
    the data can be edited, cut, copied, pasted, dragged and dropped much as
    text in these can. A cursor marks the current position. Pressing the
    <keycap>Insert</keycap> key toggles between the overwrite and insert modes.
    The overwrite mode is stricter than in text editors, as it doesn't allow any
    operation which changes the size of the byte array.</para>

    <para>Other than in text editors the content is displayed in two variants.
    Only one of these is active with regard to new input. There are two linked
    cursors shown for the value and the character display, the cursor of
    the active one is blinking. With the characters active, characters can be
    entered as known from text editors. With the values active, typing a digit
    will open a minimal editor to enter the rest of the value.</para>

    <para>The search dialog allows the user to search for a specific string of
    bytes, definable as values (hexadecimal, decimal, octal, binary) or text
    (current 8-bit encoding or UTF-8).</para>

    <para>Multiple byte arrays can be open at the same time, but only one can be
    active. Use the <guimenu>Windows</guimenu> menu to select which byte array will
    be active.</para>
</sect1>


</chapter>
